chore: design for  generators/stores v2alpha1 (#4792)
external-secrets/external-secrets: design/014-secretstore-generator-v2.md

```yaml
---
title: SecretStores and Generators v2
version: v1alpha1
authors: Gustavo Carvalho
creation-date: 2025-05-18
status: approved
---
```

# SecretStores and Generators v2

## Table of Contents

<!-- toc -->
// autogen please
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This Document describes a design proposal for SecretStores and Generators on its v2 version.

## Motivation

> Currently, There are a number of features that cannot be easily done with the current codebase / CRD structure for SecretStores and Generators, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, there are a number of features that cannot be easily done with the codebase / CRD structure for SecretStores and Generators, including:
```

* Different Provider Versioning;
* Allowing first-class support for out-of-tree providers;
* Allowing to install/uninstall SecretStores and Generators wanted / not wanted by the user.
* Referent authentication modes are implicit and hard to learn / use.

Furthermore, Generators and SecretStores themselves have different core features, while in reality, we should make them have the same feature set, if not sharing the same codebase:

> * SecretStores support ClusterSecretStores with Referrent Authentication and cross namespace generation; Generators dont;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SecretStores support ClusterSecretStores with Referent Authentication and cross-namespace generation; Generators don't;
```

* Badly configured SecretStores prevent jobs to happen via a gating mechanism; Generators dont;

## Proposal

The proposal is a new CRD for both SecretStores and Generators that unifies all of their feature sets, bringing the best of the worlds. Since this is a significant change, the idea is to also leverage a new controller and client manager for this CRD, in order to make it easier to maintain and scale.

While changing the provider interface for both SecretStores and Generators itself is a non goal, it might be needed to accomodate this proposal.

### SecretStore
SecretStore manifests looks very much like our original implementation. Provider configuration resides on `spec.provider` field. 
```yaml
apiVersion: secretstore.external-secrets.io/v2alpha1
kind: AWSSecretManager
metadata:
  name: my-aws-store
  namespace: default
spec:
  refreshInterval: 1m
  controller: dev
  retrySettings:
    maxRetries: 3
    retryInterval: 10s
  providerConfig:
    type: InTree/OutOfTree
    address: http+unix:///path/to/socket.sock
  cachingPolicy: ProviderDefined/Secrets/Auth/All/None
  cacheConfig: # if Caching Policy is Secrets/Auth/All 
      ttl: 1m

>       maxEntries: 100

Author: This would allow for implementations like https://github.com/external-secrets/external-secrets/pull/4727 to be completely safe and make sure Secret Managers themselves can be free to implement this sort of protection.

CC @watsonian

  gatingPolicy: Enabled/Disabled
  provider: ## same as current secretstore.Provider field
      role: arn:aws:iam::123456789012:role/external-secrets
      region: eu-central-1
      auth:
        secretRef:
          accessKeyIDSecretRef:
            name: awssm-secret
            key: access-key
            # note: namespace key in here is always blank. and removed from manifests
          secretAccessKeySecretRef:
            name: awssm-secret
            key: secret-access-key    
```
New fields would be:
* gatingPolicy - per SecretStore, explicit behavior for `enablefloodGate` flag (currently at controller level only)
* cachingPolicy - as to document per SecretStore what's the caching strategy (cachingScope, ttl, maxEntries). As some secretStores do not have this control in place. `ProviderDefined` policy means whatever the provider defines as the best practice.

> * providerConfig (this name is terrible) - whether this is an InTree or OutOfTree provider. if OutOfTree, we don't expect any of the `Provider` Interface to be implemented, and instead just delegate to the outOfTree provider that a new job needs to be executed to fetch a given Secret. It is the provider responsibility to then Read the CRDs and any other references to it to reply with a valid `map[string][]byte`

Author: Think of it as delegating the `GetProviderSecretData` method for that specific provider instead of wanting a `Provider`  Interface  to exist for this CR.

Reviewer: You didn't describe what address would be? Is that to a binary? A unix socket would mean that something is literally running inside the pod or has access to a shared volume.

Author: Ah! comment is here!

Yeah, it would be to a binary, mounted via a shared volume via CSI/daemonset. Im not that concerned with this one as it is really just to support safe out-of-tree plugins, not to move our own stuff to it. So it is a better extension point for it (one that we lack because of the current Provider Interface (that does not get the object, just gets the `remoteRef`).

Author: thats a possibility. Though, how would point out our own intree code?

I mean, that would mean we need to move it all outOfTree right?

While changing the provider interface for both SecretStores and Generators itself is a non goal, it might be needed to accomodate this proposal.

### SecretStore
SecretStore manifests looks very much like our original implementation. Provider configuration goes to their specific CRD manifests. 
```yaml
apiVersion: secretstore.external-secrets.io/v2alpha1
kind: SecretStore
metadata:
  name: my-aws-store
  namespace: default
spec:
  refreshInterval: 1m
  controller: dev
  retrySettings:
    maxRetries: 3
    retryInterval: 10s
  providerConfig:
    address: http+unix:///path/to/aws.sock
    providerRef:
      name: my-aws-store
      namespace: default
      kind: AWSSecretManager
    auth:
      clientCertificate: {}
      serviceAccountRef: {}
      spiffeRef: {}
  cachingPolicy: ProviderDefined/Secrets/Auth/All/None
  cacheConfig: # if Caching Policy is Secrets/Auth/All 
      ttl: 1m
      maxEntries: 100

>   gatingPolicy: Enabled/Disabled

Author: removed caching

    auth: {} # same as SecretStore
  cachingPolicy: ProviderDefined/Secrets/Auth/All/None
  cacheConfig: # if Caching Policy is Secrets/Auth/All 
      ttl: 1m
      maxEntries: 100
  gatingPolicy: Enabled/Disabled
  authenticationScope: ProviderNamespace/ManifestNamespace
  conditions:
  - namespaceSelector: {}
    namespaces: []
    namespaceRegexes: []
```
This CRD introduces the `providerRef` concept - as this is where the `provider` session of the store is going to be obtained.
We make the `authenticationScope` also as a new field to explicitly configure the behavior of the SecretStore (use the provider namespace, or use the ManifestNamespace), to provide the referrent authentication feature.

With this change, we only need maintain providers by different CRDs in one layer - the Namespaced one. Anything else that wants to be exported to the cluster will need to have a backing SecretStore to it.

Note: Common field on the ClusterSecretStore with the SecretStore ones could be possibly removed from the spec :thinking: I am not sure if there is any benefit in overwriting them or keeping them as of yet.

### Generator
```yaml
apiVersion: generator.external-secrets.io/v2alpha1

> kind: Password

Author: yes lol

PushSecret(SecretStoreSpec, *corev1.Secret, PushSecretData) error
DeleteSecret(SecretStoreSpec, PushSecretRemoteRef) error
SecretExists(SecretStoreSpec, PushSecretRemoteRef) (bool, error)
GetAllSecrets(SecretStoreSpec, ExternalSecretFind) (map[string][]byte, error)

Validate(SecretStoreSpec) (admission.Warnings, error)

Capabilities(SecretStoreSpec) SecretStoreCapabilities
```

#### GeneratorV2

```
Generate(GeneratorSpec) (map[string][]byte, GeneratorProviderState, error)
Cleanup(GeneratorSpec, GeneratorProviderState) error
```

## Out-of-Tree Providers Maintenance

### Deployment

Out-of-tree providers would be self-contained projects, each with its own dedicated Git repository, container images, issue trackers, and Helm chart. We might decide that some providers will still be released under `external-secrets` organization, or not (we can decide this afterwards). This model simplifies distribution and versioning, allowing providers to evolve independently of the core External Secrets Operator (ESO).

The user's responsibility is to deploy two main components:
1.  The core External Secrets Operator.
2.  The Helm chart for each out-of-tree provider they intend to use.

> Communication between ESO and the provider occurs over a standard Kubernetes `Service`. The `providerConfig.address` field in the `SecretStore` manifest will point to this service endpoint. We explicitly discourage co-locating providers in the same pod as ESO to maintain strict security and resource isolation boundaries.

Reviewer 2: On a different note: A gRPC connection is just a long-lived HTTP/2 connection between client and server. so there are things such as keep-alive pings and so forth. I have extensively worked with gRPC on CSI in Kubernetes and it should not be underestimated.

> Communication between ESO and the provider occurs over a standard Kubernetes `Service`. The `providerConfig.address` field in the `SecretStore` manifest will point to this service endpoint. We explicitly discourage co-locating providers in the same pod as ESO to maintain strict security and resource isolation boundaries.

Reviewer 2: Anyhow, to summarize: I think we should NOT open up arbitrary topologies for providers from the start. Not opposed to do this eventually but IMO the first run of this should be a bit simpler. Happy to be overruled here though

> Communication between ESO and the provider occurs over a standard Kubernetes `Service`. The `providerConfig.address` field in the `SecretStore` manifest will point to this service endpoint. We explicitly discourage co-locating providers in the same pod as ESO to maintain strict security and resource isolation boundaries.

Reviewer: We actually have a working unix socket based plugin architecture that could be viable here. But Moritz already said that he doesn't really like JSON over HTTP I believe. :)

### Governance

To foster a healthy ecosystem of community-maintained providers, a clear governance model is essential. We propose:

*   **Repository Structure**: A new GitHub repository for each provider (e.g., `external-secrets-provider-aws`) will house the code for each provider.
*   **Provider Lifecycle**: A promotion-based lifecycle (e.g., `experimental` -> `stable`) will be used to signal the maturity and stability of each provider.
*   **Ownership and Contribution**: Each provider will have dedicated `CODEOWNERS`. Contributions will follow a standard pull-request workflow, ensuring quality and consistency.
*  **Community Providers on specific repository**: Community providers could all exist on a `external-secrets-provider-community` 

This structure provides a clear path for community contributions while ensuring a baseline of quality and security for all official out-of-tree providers.

## Migration Strategy

A phased migration is recommended to ensure a smooth transition from `v1` to `v2` SecretStores without disrupting existing workflows.

> ### Phase 1: Early Adoption via a Plugin Provider

Reviewer 3: > We don’t actually gain much from this, because real compatibility testing requires a full migration without the plugin provider (thats phase 2 here). Provider developers can’t know how their code behaves otherwise before they did that IMO.

if we provide said plugin **and** provide an ESO image without  providers (should be as simple as a [go build tag comment in this file](https://github.com/external-secrets/external-secrets/blob/9e57660ed56d976ff92f8dd152866c709cf9de78/pkg/provider/register/register.go#L19-L55) and a bit of wiring in CI), then users have the advantage of running ESO without a gazillion dependencies, which significantly reduces the attack surface for supply chain attacks.

Sure, users will have to do a migration eventually. With the plugin they can do it earlier (and they have an incentive to do so), which makes the transition smoother for them as they just need to move the `spec.provider.plugin` config to the v2 SecretStore. 

The underlying assumption here is, that it will take a bit of time until the proposal has been implemented and ~~the majority~~ some of the providers are available out of tree. The intention here is to materialize the gains as we go with the implementation of this proposal. This should help us to test, verify and deliver v2 SecretStore bit by bit. 

I'm just a bit cautious, as this is a difficult endeavour.

> ### Phase 1: Early Adoption via a Plugin Provider

Reviewer 2: Ack, resolving as I agree.

## Summary

This proposes a v2 architecture and API for SecretStores and Generators in External Secrets Operator. The primary goals are to:

- Support out-of-tree providers as first-class citizens, allowing independent versioning and distribution.
- Unify feature sets of SecretStores and Generators (e.g. refresh, gating) under consistent CRDs and controllers.
- Make referent authentication modes explicit and easier to use.
- Allow users to install only the providers they need.
- reduce the dependency footprint of ESO to improve its security posture

There are several limitations in the current (v1) SecretStore and Generator architectures that hinder flexibility and maintainability:

- Different provider versioning is not possible.
- Out-of-tree providers are not first-class - they're only supported through the webhook provider.
- Users cannot easily install/uninstall only the desired providers.
- Referent authentication modes are implicit and hard to learn/use.

## Goals

- Implement new CRDs: SecretStore/v2alpha1, ClusterSecretStore/v2alpha1, Generator/v2alpha1, ClusterGenerator/v2alpha1.
- Enable ESO to run without in-tree providers; users install providers separately.

> - Provide a provider configuration model that connects to out-of-tree providers via gRPC/TLS.

Reviewer: Okay, fair points. 👍

- Make referent authentication explicit (e.g., authentication scope for cluster-scoped resources).
- Add unified behaviors: refresh intervals, controller classes, retry settings, and gating policies.
- Maintain ExternalSecret/PushSecret compatibility via apiVersion on storeRef.
- Provide a migration path from v1 to v2, including a v1 plugin provider bridge and dedicated builds without v1 code.

> - Deliver all providers (e.g., AWS/GCP/Vault) as out-of-tree projects.

Reviewer 3: yeah, that's part of the stable graduation criteria.

- Migrate the existing end-to-end tests into the new out-of-tree structure
- Provide documentation to validate and explain the new model.

## Proposal

### Overview

ESO will run without bundled providers. Users deploy desired providers independently as separate services. ESO connects to providers over the network using secure gRPC/TLS.

![Out of Tree](../assets/eso-out-of-tree.png)

### API Resources

#### SecretStore

> Remove `spec.provider` and introduce `spec.providerConfig`, which contains the endpoint and authentication required to reach an out-of-tree provider, plus a provider-owned reference forwarded on requests.

Reviewer 2: I think the proposal is about not removing spec.Provider at first during migration period right?

> Remove `spec.provider` and introduce `spec.providerConfig`, which contains the endpoint and authentication required to reach an out-of-tree provider, plus a provider-owned reference forwarded on requests.

Author: We are leveraging a new group already, for what it’s worth it’s not the same resource and migration isn’t via controllers/webhooks - it’s user faced

> Remove `spec.provider` and introduce `spec.providerConfig`, which contains the endpoint and authentication required to reach an out-of-tree provider, plus a provider-owned reference forwarded on requests.

Author: > Changing groups is really not an obvious trick.
> It makes upgrading really error-prone:
> With a "simple" look it will be difficult to know which resource it is; just missing the group (something no-one > really had a look at before on CRD) could break an object.

There will be no good solution anyways. Either users will have to learn about a new resource or to learn about the existence of the same resource with a group. We've already tried keeping things the same to minimize user impact (by adding conversion logic ourselves between versionings and by having different group/kind names when we moved from KES to ESO), and the hard truth is that none minimized user impact, they still needed to run fully named `kubectl` commands to figure out versions (and we introduced a new point of failure via the conversion webhook).

> On controller side:
> As the controller runtime just reconciles on name/namespace, it will have to "guess" what version to reconcile.
> Or we would have to duplicate another controller just for this new group.

That would only be applicable if we intended to leverage the same controller code to reconcile both resources - and I think that's a bad idea :smile:.  We can create new controller with watches for specific GVK matching that. Controller level, it would only get the correct resource.

### New Provider Interfaces

Provider and Generator interfaces are updated to pass full specs and enable provider-side processing.

```go
type ProviderV2 interface {
  GetSecret(SecretStoreSpec, ExternalSecretDataRemoteRef) ([]byte, error)
  PushSecret(SecretStoreSpec, *corev1.Secret, PushSecretData) error
  DeleteSecret(SecretStoreSpec, PushSecretRemoteRef) error
  SecretExists(SecretStoreSpec, PushSecretRemoteRef) (bool, error)
  GetAllSecrets(SecretStoreSpec, ExternalSecretFind) (map[string][]byte, error)
  Validate(SecretStoreSpec) (admission.Warnings, error)
  Capabilities(SecretStoreSpec) SecretStoreCapabilities
}

type GeneratorV2 interface {
  Generate(GeneratorSpec) (map[string][]byte, GeneratorProviderState, error)
  Cleanup(GeneratorSpec, GeneratorProviderState) error
}
```

### Out-of-Tree Providers Maintenance

#### Deployment

Out-of-tree providers are separate projects with their own repos, images, and Helm charts. Users deploy ESO and the providers they need. ESO connects to providers via a Kubernetes Service indicated by `providerConfig.address`. Co-locating providers as sidecars is **discouraged** to preserve isolation and scalability.

#### Governance

> - One repo per "official" eso maintained provider (e.g., `provider-aws`).

Reviewer 2: im wondering: whats the benefit of us tracking official providers in separate repositories? Is there a specific benefit we like to see over e.g. maintaining a go.mod in a subolder? especially wondering because provider-contrib is also just one big repo in the proposal?

Reviewer 3: Having them in a subdirectory would work for me, too. I guess i'm just used to having separate repositories. What i dislike about having everything in one repo is that in some shared areas (CI, root-level Makefile, CODEOWNERS etc) it gets quite cluttered over time.

Author: Mono repo makes eventual provider transfers (eg AWS SM to AWS people ) way harder. Just my own two cents)

Reviewer: Or maybe you're thinking once people start adopting it, it's more difficult to point them to a new repository? I'm not too concerned about that. We could always just start deprecating it and moving to a new repo with ample of time for people to migrate out.

- CODEOWNERS and standard PR workflows per provider.
- A collective community repo `provider-contrib` for community-maintained providers.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

- Do not implement Unix domain sockets for sidecars; providers should run as independent deployments to ensure horizontal scalability, separate network policies, and stronger isolation.
- Cluster-scoped resources delegate to namespaced providers; referent authentication is explicit via `authenticationScope`.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Operational overhead: Users manage separate provider deployments 
    - mitigated by dedicated Helm charts and independent versioning per provider.
- Maintenance overhead: every provider needs similar infrastructure such as a helm chart, e2e test framework and test cases, a common library to bootstrap the provider's GRPC server, metrics, initialising clients etc.
    - mitigated by providing one or more `common` repos, e.g. `provider-common` which host the shared code among eso-core and all providers (similar to https://github.com/fluxcd/pkg).
- TLS management: someone needs to manage the TLS certs/keys: do we push it to the user or do we provide it ourselves?

>     - mitigated by (1) implement certificate management with `cert-controller` and  provide an integration mechanism with cert-manager.

Reviewer 2: Im not sure if we should even introduce full certificate rotation

Reviewer 2: thought about this again and agree. resolving

> 

Reviewer 2: What alternative ways are you thinking of? we could for example introduce service account authentication and RBAC based tokens, but im interested to hear thoughts

> 

Author: But cert-controller is ours already, we install it everywhere by default 🙂

## Design Details

### Test Plan

This plan validates core changes in eso-core and out-of-tree providers, including security boundaries and migration flows.

#### Prerequisite testing updates
- Create a provider conformance test suite (library) that providers run against locally and in CI (covers GetSecret, GetAllSecrets, Push/Delete/Exists when implemented, error semantics, auth, TLS).

> - Add a fake gRPC provider for tests to simulate success, latency, failures, and version skew.

Reviewer 2: in my experience this is not required, we simply need a gRPC server to start locally. Just my 2 cents though. Especially simulating success latency and so on can be done via handlers.

- Update `ExternalSecret` manifests to use `secretStoreRef.apiVersion: secretstore.external-secrets.io/v2alpha1` and reference v2 stores.
- Decommission v1 stores after all `ExternalSecret` resources are migrated.

### Monitoring Requirements
- Add GRPC-related metrics to eso-core (client-side) as well as on the provider (server) side
- Migrate metrics (`.ObserveAPICall()`) to the provider

### Troubleshooting
A user would have the same troubleshooting flow: 
- inspect Secret
- describe ExternalSecret
- describe SecretStore
- (new) describe provider-owned resource
- inspect logs of eso-core
- (new) inspect logs of provider pods

## Drawbacks

- Increased operational complexity and responsibility for users to deploy and manage provider lifecycles in addition to ESO.
- New CRDs introduce a learning curve and require updated documentation.
- Separate repositories, issue trackers, and release pipelines for each provider increase maintenance overhead.
- Distributed maintenance across community providers can fragment ownership.

## Alternatives

- just provide a GRPC plugin mechanism and move providers out of tree without a v2 SecretStore

> - get rid of the SecretStore alltogether and directly point from a `ExternalSecret` at a `Kind=AWSSecretsManager`.

Reviewer 4: And I don't say that because some of my customers are scared of self signed CAs...!
